{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh9000\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
Ontology-based browsing of bibliographic metadata\
\
Authors: Joseba Abaitua, Josu Azpillaga, Josuka Diaz-Labrador, Jon\
Fernandez, Ines Jacob, Txus Sanchez, Fernando Quintana\
\
DELi group, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.deli.deusto.es"}}{\fldrslt http://www.deli.deusto.es}}\
Universidad de Deusto, Bilbao, Spain\
\
Key words: bibliographic metadata, taxonomies and ontologies,\
classification schemes, resource description and discovery, OAI-PMH,\
BibTeX, OWL, Prot\'8eg\'8e\
\
A logical evolution in information management is one that scales up\
from the mere use of metadata to the ellaboration of a taxonomy and\
the later incorporation of an ontology. Whereas the transit from\
metadata into an structured taxonomy is a relatively easy and direct\
step, its mapping into an ontology is a very laborious process. Apart\
from the task of metadata mapping and the assignment of logical\
relations to the categories in the ontology, there is the problem of\
finding a suitable ontology. While in some domains well developed\
ontologies can be easily obtained (as with UNSPSC), in others no\
ontology is available (as in the case of XBRL taxonomies). Given these\
difficulties, some interesting strategies are being designed to\
synchronize both processes of creating metadata taxonomies and the\
ellaboration of the ontology (Handschuh and Staab, 2003).\
\
In this poster we will show a comprehensive corpus of bibliographic\
records with two particularitities: Records are tagged using BibTeX\
and Dublin Core metadata formats, which is an important advantage\
because ontologies for both metadata versions exist. Nevertheless we\
lack a subject-based ontology (similar to Dolce or Cyc) that would\
facilitate the discovery process of these records (Welty, 1998). For\
the time being we do not know of any attempt to derive ontologies out\
of any the most widely used library classification schemes (LCC/LCSH,\
DDC, UDC, IFLA); although it should be a quite straitforward process.\
The main advantages of such schemes are that they improve thematic\
searches, harness multilingual access and increase interoperability\
with other services (Koch et al., 1997).\
\
In any case, the methodological question that we will consider are the\
ways in which an ontology of structural metadata (such as BibTeX or\
Dublin Core metadata) can improve the discovery process of\
bibliographic information (this being the reverse process of the\
ontology-focused crwaling of web documentes presented by Ehrig and\
Maedche, 2003). In this poster we will show: (i) the main achivements\
of our Open Archive Cataloger (OAC) project, which applies the OAI-PMH\
protocol for automatic metadata harvesting and aggregation of\
bibliographic records, (ii) the tools that have developed (Static\
Repository Gateway, Dynamic Data Provider, Service Provider) and (iii)\
our experience in using Prot\'8eg\'8e to evaluate the ontology-based\
metadata browsing. The challenge is important, taking into account the\
existence of powerful browsing engines solely based on the utilisation\
of metadata and string searching options, as those provided by\
Citeseer, Citebase or Google's Scholar services (Hitchcock ET al.,\
2003).\
\
References\
\
   * Marc Ehrig, Alexander Maedche. 2003. Ontology-focused crawling\
of web documents. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM Symposium on Applied\
Computing (SAC-2003) (Gary Lamont, et al. editors). March 9-12, 2003,\
Melbourne, FL, USA.\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/ehrig03ontologyfocused.html"}}{\fldrslt http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/ehrig03ontologyfocused.html}}\
\
   * Siegfried Handschuh, Steffen Staab. 2003. CREAM CREAting?\
Metadata for the Semantic Web. Computer Networks: The International\
Journal of Computer and Telecommunications Networking archive Volume\
42 , Issue 5 (August 2003) table of contents Special issue: The\
Semantic Web: an evolution for a revolution Pages: 579 - 598.\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/handschuh03cream.html"}}{\fldrslt http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/handschuh03cream.html}};\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=873831"}}{\fldrslt http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=873831}}\
\
   * Steve Hitchcock, Arouna Woukeu, Tim Brody, Les Carr, Wendy Hall\
and Stevan Harnad. 2003 Evaluating Citebase, an open access Web-based\
citation-ranked search and impact discovery service.\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/665664.html"}}{\fldrslt http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/665664.html}}\
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://opcit.eprints.org/evaluation/Citebase-evaluation/evaluation-report-tr.html"}}{\fldrslt http://opcit.eprints.org/evaluation/Citebase-evaluation/evaluation-report-tr.html}}\
\
   * Traugott Koch, Anna Br\'9fmmer, Debra Hiom, Marianne Peereboom,\
Alan Poulter, Emma Worsfold. The role of classification schemes in\
Internet resource description and discovery. Project deliverable D3.2.\
DESIRE - Development of a European Service for Information on Research\
and Education. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ifla.org/documents/libraries/cataloging/classv10.pdf"}}{\fldrslt http://www.ifla.org/documents/libraries/cataloging/classv10.pdf}}\
\
  * Open Archive Cataloger. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.deli.deusto.es/OAC"}}{\fldrslt http://www.deli.deusto.es/OAC}}\
\
   * Christopher A. Welty. The Ontological Nature of Subject\
Taxonomies. In Nicola Guarino Christopher A. Welty (eds). A Formal\
Ontology in Information Systems. Lecture Notes In Computer Science;\
Vol. 1937. {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.cs.vassar.edu/faculty/welty/papers/fois-98/fois-98.ps"}}{\fldrslt http://www.cs.vassar.edu/faculty/welty/papers/fois-98/fois-98.ps}}\
}